hunting northern Idaho was definitely a
drawcard for its unlimited non-resident
over-the-counter tags and large
wilderness areas open for public hunting
but I also chose it for another reason
to get there at first meant we traveled
to the hunting mecca and neighboring
western state of Montana and in
particular the small town of Missoula it
was there prior to the hunt that I plan
to meet some very special people that
work in an organization that play a
crucial role in this story located just
north of town is the headquarters of the
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation bound by
the mission statement of hunting is
conservation this member based group has
been responsible for preserving a
staggering amount of habitat for public
use while directly funding and assisting
in the recovery and preservation of huge
numbers of elk across the u.s. the head
office and visitor center at missoula
gives people a thorough insight into
their conservation programs through
interactive displays and for hunters the
trophy room of the jaw-dropping
collection of announced and taxidermy
after a fascinating tour of the complex
are caught up with Blake Henning to
learn more like as a hunter and
conservationists myself it's really a
privilege to be here with you today in
this magnificent building your
headquarters here in Missoula Montana
for those that aren't familiar with the
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation can you
fill us in on what you're all about yeah
the rocky mountain elk foundation is a
non-profit charitable wildlife
conservation and hunting heritage
organization we have about 200,000
members nationally and we are focused on
ensuring the future of elk other
wildlife their habitat and our hunting
heritage here in the United States and
Canada who the founding members of the
organization and how was it formed there
were four gentlemen from Troy Montana
that formed the organization in 1984 and
so we've been around nearly 30 years
those founders were interested in
enhancing habitat and bit focusing on
really the monarch of the West the
and I'd add these mohandas themselves
they were hunters themselves absolutely
so any 30 years of existence you've
achieved some excellent results for
hunting and conservation let's go
through those now well the big number
that we talked about is 6.3 million
acres improved or enhanced across the
country a part of that 6.3 million acres
there's a million acres of land
permanently protected there's about six
hundred forty thousand acres of lands
open to hunter access that were not open
before and then elk restoration is a
very popular topic right now and we've
helped restore elk in seven states most
recently in virginia and missouri out in
the eastern part of the United States we
should clarify hit those elk have been
gone for a long time and I xasan state
70 yes they elk had been extirpated for
nearly 150 years in those states that
was Judah bicycle hunting and may try
and fit you know I think mostly
overhunting you're talking about back in
the early 1800s where subsistence
hunting for me took took most of them l
out so take us through how program runs
for restoring you know well first of all
the people of that state have to be
interested in bringing out back there a
large animal and there are going to be
some challenges with having elf back in
a fairly populated states such as
Missouri or Virginia the state secondly
the state wildlife agency has to be on
board they want to have to bring them on
they need to seek our cooperation we
want to cooperate we want to be there
but they're really the folks in charge
of bringing them back and we encourage a
feasibility study so we look at social
economic and habitat requirements of the
state can I handle elk from all those
from all those sources of input and once
those things are kind of analyzed and
put together the state wildlife agency
will make a decision and if the decision
is to go then the
foundation comes in with money and
people to support the effort and the
next thing we're doing is trying to
locate the elk that will move back to
that state this is some serious
resources and time and money and effort
going before those it elk jump out of
the trailer oh absolutely we can spend
two or three years planning analyzing
and getting ready restoration efforts
will cost well over a million dollars at
times and you're talking about moving
elk thousands of miles back to these
states and these completely wild animals
that it completely wild yes yeah no no
game farm no pen raised animals as a
part of a restoration that we're going
to do on a personal level I think it's
fantastic that some of the land you're
actively pursuing and reopening and
conserving is not just for hunters even
though your group of hunters it's for
everyone yes absolutely there's many
benefits to protecting land or enhancing
habitats out there there are well over
30 to 40 species that generally occupy
the same kind of habitats that help do
and so while hunters often pay the bills
and support this kind of work hikers
campers bird watchers all benefit from
the work that we're doing something
she'd be very paddle we we are very
proud of it yes and you know part of our
mission statement is other wildlife so
we're not not just focused on elko we
want to we want to help everything out
there and that must really I'd in the
perception of hunting I saw some figures
that you just showed me before and
saying that that perception public
perception of hunting is at an all-time
high it certainly is and you know I
think groups like ours are trying to
tell the story of hunters and what
they've done well over a several billion
dollars hunters have put into wildlife
conservation in the last hundred years
in North America so they really have
supported it with their pocketbook and
not just so they can harvest something
and so they can enjoy the outdoors and
take their families along and enjoy the
traditions of it was about the
paths what's the current situation and
what's in store for the future well
currently you know
populations are pretty strong I mean
there are some places in isolated areas
where predators about impacts but but
nationally if you look at you know a
nearly a million elk or so across the
country opportunities for hunters are
good and we just need to kind of spread
the word about how hunting is
conservation and the role that hunters
play and the work that we do and then
access to as a key point for hunters
really the number one reason today why
hunter stop hunting is lack of access
and so we really see our role out there
in the future is helping improve and
open up access to either private or
public lands and bringing bringing
resources to bear so we can have more
hunters and and folks out in the field
well congratulations I think it's a
fantastic fantastic effort what you're
doing here I think it's a privilege for
Andrew and I be able to come over here
from Australia and get an
over-the-counter tag and trekking
through the wilderness and hopefully
have a shot at an elk I'm gonna go over
and proudly sign up today hopefully some
more people from Australia will but it's
good to know that your message is
reaching reaching far and wide well
thank you very much for coming and we
really appreciate your support your
membership and I wish you the best out
there in central Idaho getting after
those elk